---
title: FreeBSD14 and NGINX WITH mod_SSL PHP-FPM
date: "2025-05-19 10:11:13 +0100"
id: nginx-mod-ssl-freebsd-php-fpm
lang: en
layout: single
author_profile: true
categories:
  - FreeBSD
tags: "WebServer"
excerpt: Server blocks, known in Apache as virtual hosts, are the foundation of Nginx's ability to host multiple domains from a single server.
keywords: nginx, mod ssl, mod, php, php-fpm, http, https, 80, 443, openssl, freebsd, web server
---

When you’re setting up a web server, whether for personal or commercial use, it’s important to understand how the server responds to different types of requests. This knowledge becomes especially relevant when working with Nginx, a popular web server used for its high performance and flexibility in hosting multiple websites on a single machine.

Server blocks, known in Apache as virtual hosts, are the foundation of Nginx’s ability to host multiple domains from a single server. Each block can be configured with specific rules to handle requests for different domain names. This functionality allows Nginx to serve the correct content based on the domain name of the incoming request.

In serving client requests to access the web server, NGINX does not work alone. There are other applications that help it. The role of this third-party application is not only to improve the security system but also often used to integrate NGINX so that it can communicate with other applications.

For security matters, there are many applications that can be used, but the most widely used is OpenSSL. Meanwhile, to connect NGINX with other applications such as databases, PHP is usually used.

In this article, we will discuss how to configure the NGINX web server with OpenSSL and PHP-FPM.

## 1. System Specifications
- Sistem FreeBSD: FreeBSD 14.3-PRERELEASE
- IP Address: 192.168.5.71
- Hostname: ns4
- Versi PHP: PHP83
- Versi NGINX: nginx/1.24.0
- Dependensi: php83-ctype, php83-mbstring, php83-extensions dan php83-mysqli

## 2. Configuring NGINX with OpenSSL
The main function of OpenSSL is so that NGINX can run on port 443, which is the HTTPS port supporting the SSL/TLS protocol. By default, configuring NGINX on the FreeBSD system is very easy, even with just a few commands and setting the /etc/rc.conf file on the FreeBSD system, NGINX can run properly.

However, all of that does not guarantee a security system because NGINX can only run on port 80 and does not support a database as a place to store all NGINX data. Because by default NGINX is set to port 80, before we configure PHP-FPM, it would be better if we configure port 443 first. In this article to configure port 443, we use OpenSSL.

### a. Create an SSL Certificate
Before you run the OpenSSL command, first create a directory to store the certificate file generated by OpenSSL.

```
root@ns4:~ # mkdir -p /usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl
```

In the above command creates an ssl directory, all certificates for NGINX will be stored in this directory. After creating the SSL directory, continue by creating an SSL certificate, as in the following example.

```
root@ns4:~ # cd /usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl
root@ns4:/usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl # openssl genrsa -des3 -out server.key 2048
Enter PEM pass phrase:
Verifying - Enter PEM pass phrase:
root@ns4:/usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl #
```

As always, save the password you created above, because this is just the beginning. The password is needed to authenticate the certificate. Once you have remembered and saved the password, continue with the command below.

```
root@ns4:/usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl # openssl req -new -key server.key -out server.csr
```

Before continuing the next command, make a copy of the server.key file above. The name is free, you can determine the name as you wish.

```
root@ns4:/usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl # cp server.key server.key.backup
```

The copy file is very important, because we will create an RSA key with it. Then continue with the following command.

```
root@ns4:/usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl # openssl rsa -in server.key.backup -out server.key
writing RSA key
```

The next step is to request a certificate signature.

```
root@ns4:/usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl # openssl x509 -req -days 365 -in server.csr -signkey server.key -out server.crt
Certificate request self-signature ok
subject=C = AU, ST = washington, L = miami, O = mediatama, OU = networking, CN = datainchi.com, emailAddress = datainchi@gmail.com
```
Once the signature request is approved, create a symlink file from the server.crt file.

```
root@ns4:/usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl # ln -s /usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl/server.crt /usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl/ssl-bundle.crt
```

The certificate creation process is complete, now you can set up the NGINX configuration file.

### b. Connecting NGINX with SSL Certificate

To connect the SSL certificate that you have created above with NGINX, you must open the main NGINX configuration file, namely /usr/local/etc/nginx/nginx.conf. In that file, you only change a few scripts. An example of an NGINX SSL script can be seen as in the example below.

```
listen 443 ssl http2;
server_name  localhost;
ssl_certificate /usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl/ssl-bundle.crt;
ssl_certificate_key /usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl/server.key;

ssl_protocols TLSv1 TLSv1.1 TLSv1.2;
ssl_session_cache shared:SSL:1m;
ssl_session_timeout  5m;
#ssl_ciphers  HIGH:!aNULL:!MD5;
ssl_prefer_server_ciphers on;
ssl_ciphers ECDHE-ECDSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:ECDHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:ECDHE-ECDSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384:ECDHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384:ECDHE-ECDSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305:ECDHE-RSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305:DHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:DHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384;
add_header Strict-Transport-Security "max-age=63072000" always;
```

After you change the /usr/local/etc/nginx/nginx.conf script, reload the NGINX server.

```
root@ns4:/usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl # service nginx restart
Stopping nginx.
Waiting for PIDS: 1334.
Starting nginx.
root@ns4:/usr/local/etc/nginx/ssl #
```
To prove it, open the Google Chrome web browser, and type "https://192.168.5.71/".

3. Konfigurasi NGINX dengan PHP-FPM
PHP-FPM (FastCGI Process Manager) merupakan implementasi PHP alternatif FastCGI yang paling populer. PHP (akronim dari PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor) merupakan salah satu bahasa pemrograman sumber terbuka paling populer di Internet, yang digunakan untuk platform pengembangan web seperti Magento, WordPress, atau Drupal. Meskipun awalnya dirancang untuk melakukan pra-proses teks biasa dalam format UTF-8.










Mengatur NGINX dan FreeBSD 14 Dengan mod_SSL dan PHP-FPM
